 Let us leave the Pythagoreans for the present; for it is enough to
have touched on them as much as we have done. But as for those who
posit the Ideas as causes, firstly, in seeking to grasp the causes
of the things around us, they introduced others equal in number to
these, as if a man who wanted to count things thought he would not
be able to do it while they were few, but tried to count them when
he had added to their number. For the Forms are practically equal
to-or not fewer than-the things, in trying to explain which these
thinkers proceeded from them to the Forms. For to each thing there
answers an entity which has the same name and exists apart from the
substances, and so also in the case of all other groups there is a one
over many, whether the many are in this world or are eternal.
    Further, of the ways in which we prove that the Forms exist,
none is convincing; for from some no inference necessarily follows,
and from some arise Forms even of things of which we think there are
no Forms. For according to the arguments from the existence of the
sciences there will be Forms of all things of which there are sciences
and according to the 'one over many' argument there will be Forms even
of negations, and according to the argument that there is an object
for thought even when the thing has perished, there will be Forms of
perishable things; for we have an image of these. Further, of the more
accurate arguments, some lead to Ideas of relations, of which we say
there is no independent class, and others introduce the 'third man'.
    And in general the arguments for the Forms destroy the things
for whose existence we are more zealous than for the existence of
the Ideas; for it follows that not the dyad but number is first,
i.e. that the relative is prior to the absolute,-besides all the other
points on which certain people by following out the opinions held
about the Ideas have come into conflict with the principles of the
theory.
    Further, according to the assumption on which our belief in the
Ideas rests, there will be Forms not only of substances but also of
many other things (for the concept is single not only in the case of
substances but also in the other cases, and there are sciences not
only of substance but also of other things, and a thousand other
such difficulties confront them). But according to the necessities
of the case and the opinions held about the Forms, if Forms can be
shared in there must be Ideas of substances only. For they are not
shared in incidentally, but a thing must share in its Form as in
something not predicated of a subject (by 'being shared in
incidentally' I mean that e.g. if a thing shares in 'double itself',
it shares also in 'eternal', but incidentally; for 'eternal' happens
to be predicable of the 'double'). Therefore the Forms will be
substance; but the same terms indicate substance in this and in the
ideal world (or what will be the meaning of saying that there is
something apart from the particulars-the one over many?). And if the
Ideas and the particulars that share in them have the same form, there
will be something common to these; for why should '2' be one and the
same in the perishable 2's or in those which are many but eternal, and
not the same in the '2' itself' as in the particular 2? But if they
have not the same form, they must have only the name in common, and it
is as if one were to call both Callias and a wooden image a 'man',
without observing any community between them.
    Above all one might discuss the question what on earth the Forms
contribute to sensible things, either to those that are eternal or
to those that come into being and cease to be. For they cause
neither movement nor any change in them. But again they help in no
wise either towards the knowledge of the other things (for they are
not even the substance of these, else they would have been in them),
or towards their being, if they are not in the particulars which share
in them; though if they were, they might be thought to be causes, as
white causes whiteness in a white object by entering into its
composition. But this argument, which first Anaxagoras and later
Eudoxus and certain others used, is very easily upset; for it is not
difficult to collect many insuperable objections to such a view.
    But, further, all other things cannot come from the Forms in any
of the usual senses of 'from'. And to say that they are patterns and
the other things share in them is to use empty words and poetical
metaphors. For what is it that works, looking to the Ideas? And
anything can either be, or become, like another without being copied
from it, so that whether Socrates or not a man Socrates like might
come to be; and evidently this might be so even if Socrates were
eternal. And there will be several patterns of the same thing, and
therefore several Forms; e.g. 'animal' and 'two-footed' and also
'man himself' will be Forms of man. Again, the Forms are patterns
not only sensible things, but of Forms themselves also; i.e. the
genus, as genus of various species, will be so; therefore the same
thing will be pattern and copy.
    Again, it would seem impossible that the substance and that of
which it is the substance should exist apart; how, therefore, could
the Ideas, being the substances of things, exist apart? In the Phaedo'
the case is stated in this way-that the Forms are causes both of being
and of becoming; yet when the Forms exist, still the things that share
in them do not come into being, unless there is something to originate
movement; and many other things come into being (e.g. a house or a
ring) of which we say there are no Forms. Clearly, therefore, even the
other things can both be and come into being owing to such causes as
produce the things just mentioned.
    Again, if the Forms are numbers, how can they be causes? Is it
because existing things are other numbers, e.g. one number is man,
another is Socrates, another Callias? Why then are the one set of
numbers causes of the other set? It will not make any difference
even if the former are eternal and the latter are not. But if it is
because things in this sensible world (e.g. harmony) are ratios of
numbers, evidently the things between which they are ratios are some
one class of things. If, then, this--the matter--is some definite
thing, evidently the numbers themselves too will be ratios of
something to something else. E.g. if Callias is a numerical ratio
between fire and earth and water and air, his Idea also will be a
number of certain other underlying things; and man himself, whether it
is a number in a sense or not, will still be a numerical ratio of
certain things and not a number proper, nor will it be a of number
merely because it is a numerical ratio.
    Again, from many numbers one number is produced, but how can one
Form come from many Forms? And if the number comes not from the many
numbers themselves but from the units in them, e.g. in 10,000, how
is it with the units? If they are specifically alike, numerous
absurdities will follow, and also if they are not alike (neither the
units in one number being themselves like one another nor those in
other numbers being all like to all); for in what will they differ, as
they are without quality? This is not a plausible view, nor is it
consistent with our thought on the matter.
    Further, they must set up a second kind of number (with which
arithmetic deals), and all the objects which are called 'intermediate'
by some thinkers; and how do these exist or from what principles do
they proceed? Or why must they be intermediate between the things in
this sensible world and the things-themselves?
    Further, the units in must each come from a prior but this is
impossible.
    Further, why is a number, when taken all together, one?
    Again, besides what has been said, if the units are diverse the
Platonists should have spoken like those who say there are four, or
two, elements; for each of these thinkers gives the name of element
not to that which is common, e.g. to body, but to fire and earth,
whether there is something common to them, viz. body, or not. But in
fact the Platonists speak as if the One were homogeneous like fire
or water; and if this is so, the numbers will not be substances.
Evidently, if there is a One itself and this is a first principle,
'one' is being used in more than one sense; for otherwise the theory
is impossible.
    When we wish to reduce substances to their principles, we state
that lines come from the short and long (i.e. from a kind of small and
great), and the plane from the broad and narrow, and body from the
deep and shallow. Yet how then can either the plane contain a line, or
the solid a line or a plane? For the broad and narrow is a different
class from the deep and shallow. Therefore, just as number is not
present in these, because the many and few are different from these,
evidently no other of the higher classes will be present in the lower.
But again the broad is not a genus which includes the deep, for then
the solid would have been a species of plane. Further, from what
principle will the presence of the points in the line be derived?
Plato even used to object to this class of things as being a
geometrical fiction. He gave the name of principle of the line-and
this he often posited-to the indivisible lines. Yet these must have
a limit; therefore the argument from which the existence of the line
follows proves also the existence of the point.
    In general, though philosophy seeks the cause of perceptible
things, we have given this up (for we say nothing of the cause from
which change takes its start), but while we fancy we are stating the
substance of perceptible things, we assert the existence of a second
class of substances, while our account of the way in which they are
the substances of perceptible things is empty talk; for 'sharing',
as we said before, means nothing.
    Nor have the Forms any connexion with what we see to be the
cause in the case of the arts, that for whose sake both all mind and
the whole of nature are operative,-with this cause which we assert
to be one of the first principles; but mathematics has come to be
identical with philosophy for modern thinkers, though they say that it
should be studied for the sake of other things. Further, one might
suppose that the substance which according to them underlies as matter
is too mathematical, and is a predicate and differentia of the
substance, ie. of the matter, rather than matter itself; i.e. the
great and the small are like the rare and the dense which the physical
philosophers speak of, calling these the primary differentiae of the
substratum; for these are a kind of excess and defect. And regarding
movement, if the great and the small are to he movement, evidently the
Forms will be moved; but if they are not to be movement, whence did
movement come? The whole study of nature has been annihilated.
    And what is thought to be easy-to show that all things are
one-is not done; for what is proved by the method of setting out
instances is not that all things are one but that there is a One
itself,-if we grant all the assumptions. And not even this follows, if
we do not grant that the universal is a genus; and this in some
cases it cannot be.
    Nor can it be explained either how the lines and planes and solids
that come after the numbers exist or can exist, or what significance
they have; for these can neither be Forms (for they are not
numbers), nor the intermediates (for those are the objects of
mathematics), nor the perishable things. This is evidently a
distinct fourth class.
    In general, if we search for the elements of existing things
without distinguishing the many senses in which things are said to
exist, we cannot find them, especially if the search for the
elements of which things are made is conducted in this manner. For
it is surely impossible to discover what 'acting' or 'being acted on',
or 'the straight', is made of, but if elements can be discovered at
all, it is only the elements of substances; therefore either to seek
the elements of all existing things or to think one has them is
incorrect.
    And how could we learn the elements of all things? Evidently we
cannot start by knowing anything before. For as he who is learning
geometry, though he may know other things before, knows none of the
things with which the science deals and about which he is to learn, so
is it in all other cases. Therefore if there is a science of all
things, such as some assert to exist, he who is learning this will
know nothing before. Yet all learning is by means of premisses which
are (either all or some of them) known before,-whether the learning be
by demonstration or by definitions; for the elements of the definition
must be known before and be familiar; and learning by induction
proceeds similarly. But again, if the science were actually innate, it
were strange that we are unaware of our possession of the greatest
of sciences.
    Again, how is one to come to know what all things are made of, and
how is this to be made evident? This also affords a difficulty; for
there might be a conflict of opinion, as there is about certain
syllables; some say za is made out of s and d and a, while others
say it is a distinct sound and none of those that are familiar.
    Further, how could we know the objects of sense without having the
sense in question? Yet we ought to, if the elements of which all
things consist, as complex sounds consist of the clements proper to
sound, are the same.
                                  10

    It is evident, then, even from what we have said before, that
all men seem to seek the causes named in the Physics, and that we
cannot name any beyond these; but they seek these vaguely; and
though in a sense they have all been described before, in a sense they
have not been described at all. For the earliest philosophy is, on all
subjects, like one who lisps, since it is young and in its beginnings.
For even Empedocles says bone exists by virtue of the ratio in it. Now
this is the essence and the substance of the thing. But it is
similarly necessary that flesh and each of the other tissues should be
the ratio of its elements, or that not one of them should; for it is
on account of this that both flesh and bone and everything else will
exist, and not on account of the matter, which he names,-fire and
earth and water and air. But while he would necessarily have agreed if
another had said this, he has not said it clearly.
    On these questions our views have been expressed before; but let
us return to enumerate the difficulties that might be raised on
these same points; for perhaps we may get from them some help
towards our later difficulties.
                                Book II
                                   1

    THE investigation of the truth is in one way hard, in another
easy. An indication of this is found in the fact that no one is able
to attain the truth adequately, while, on the other hand, we do not
collectively fail, but every one says something true about the
nature of things, and while individually we contribute little or
nothing to the truth, by the union of all a considerable amount is
amassed. Therefore, since the truth seems to be like the proverbial
door, which no one can fail to hit, in this respect it must be easy,
but the fact that we can have a whole truth and not the particular
part we aim at shows the difficulty of it.
    Perhaps, too, as difficulties are of two kinds, the cause of the
present difficulty is not in the facts but in us. For as the eyes of
bats are to the blaze of day, so is the reason in our soul to the
things which are by nature most evident of all.
    It is just that we should be grateful, not only to those with
whose views we may agree, but also to those who have expressed more
superficial views; for these also contributed something, by developing
before us the powers of thought. It is true that if there had been
no Timotheus we should have been without much of our lyric poetry; but
if there had been no Phrynis there would have been no Timotheus. The
same holds good of those who have expressed views about the truth; for
from some thinkers we have inherited certain opinions, while the
others have been responsible for the appearance of the former.
    It is right also that philosophy should be called knowledge of the
truth. For the end of theoretical knowledge is truth, while that of
practical knowledge is action (for even if they consider how things
are, practical men do not study the eternal, but what is relative
and in the present). Now we do not know a truth without its cause; and
a thing has a quality in a higher degree than other things if in
virtue of it the similar quality belongs to the other things as well
(e.g. fire is the hottest of things; for it is the cause of the heat
of all other things); so that that causes derivative truths to be true
is most true. Hence the principles of eternal things must be always
most true (for they are not merely sometimes true, nor is there any
cause of their being, but they themselves are the cause of the being
of other things), so that as each thing is in respect of being, so
is it in respect of truth.
                                   2

    But evidently there is a first principle, and the causes of things
are neither an infinite series nor infinitely various in kind. For
neither can one thing proceed from another, as from matter, ad
infinitum (e.g. flesh from earth, earth from air, air from fire, and
so on without stopping), nor can the sources of movement form an
endless series (man for instance being acted on by air, air by the
sun, the sun by Strife, and so on without limit). Similarly the
final causes cannot go on ad infinitum,-walking being for the sake
of health, this for the sake of happiness, happiness for the sake of
something else, and so one thing always for the sake of another. And
the case of the essence is similar. For in the case of
intermediates, which have a last term and a term prior to them, the
prior must be the cause of the later terms. For if we had to say which
of the three is the cause, we should say the first; surely not the
last, for the final term is the cause of none; nor even the
intermediate, for it is the cause only of one. (It makes no difference
whether there is one intermediate or more, nor whether they are
infinite or finite in number.) But of series which are infinite in
this way, and of the infinite in general, all the parts down to that
now present are alike intermediates; so that if there is no first
there is no cause at all.
    Nor can there be an infinite process downwards, with a beginning
in the upward direction, so that water should proceed from fire, earth
from water, and so always some other kind should be produced. For
one thing comes from another in two ways-not in the sense in which
'from' means 'after' (as we say 'from the Isthmian games come the
Olympian'), but either (i) as the man comes from the boy, by the boy's
changing, or (ii) as air comes from water. By 'as the man comes from
the boy' we mean 'as that which has come to be from that which is
coming to be' or 'as that which is finished from that which is being
achieved' (for as becoming is between being and not being, so that
which is becoming is always between that which is and that which is
not; for the learner is a man of science in the making, and this is
what is meant when we say that from a learner a man of science is
being made); on the other hand, coming from another thing as water
comes from air implies the destruction of the other thing. This is why
changes of the former kind are not reversible, and the boy does not
come from the man (for it is not that which comes to be something that
comes to be as a result of coming to be, but that which exists after
the coming to be; for it is thus that the day, too, comes from the
morning-in the sense that it comes after the morning; which is the
reason why the morning cannot come from the day); but changes of the
other kind are reversible. But in both cases it is impossible that the
number of terms should be infinite. For terms of the former kind,
being intermediates, must have an end, and terms of the latter kind
change back into one another, for the destruction of either is the
generation of the other.
    At the same time it is impossible that the first cause, being
eternal, should be destroyed; for since the process of becoming is not
infinite in the upward direction, that which is the first thing by
whose destruction something came to be must be non-eternal.
    Further, the final cause is an end, and that sort of end which
is not for the sake of something else, but for whose sake everything
else is; so that if there is to be a last term of this sort, the
process will not be infinite; but if there is no such term, there will
be no final cause, but those who maintain the infinite series
eliminate the Good without knowing it (yet no one would try to do
anything if he were not going to come to a limit); nor would there
be reason in the world; the reasonable man, at least, always acts
for a purpose, and this is a limit; for the end is a limit.
    But the essence, also, cannot be reduced to another definition
which is fuller in expression. For the original definition is always
more of a definition, and not the later one; and in a series in
which the first term has not the required character, the next has
not it either. Further, those who speak thus destroy science; for it
is not possible to have this till one comes to the unanalysable terms.
And knowledge becomes impossible; for how can one apprehend things
that are infinite in this way? For this is not like the case of the
line, to whose divisibility there is no stop, but which we cannot
think if we do not make a stop (for which reason one who is tracing
the infinitely divisible line cannot be counting the possibilities
of section), but the whole line also must be apprehended by
something in us that does not move from part to part.-Again, nothing
infinite can exist; and if it could, at least the notion of infinity
is not infinite.
    But if the kinds of causes had been infinite in number, then
also knowledge would have been impossible; for we think we know,
only when we have ascertained the causes, that but that which is
infinite by addition cannot be gone through in a finite time.
                                   3

    The effect which lectures produce on a hearer depends on his
habits; for we demand the language we are accustomed to, and that
which is different from this seems not in keeping but somewhat
unintelligible and foreign because of its unwontedness. For it is
the customary that is intelligible. The force of habit is shown by the
laws, in which the legendary and childish elements prevail over our
knowledge about them, owing to habit. Thus some people do not listen
to a speaker unless he speaks mathematically, others unless he gives
instances, while others expect him to cite a poet as witness. And some
want to have everything done accurately, while others are annoyed by
accuracy, either because they cannot follow the connexion of thought
or because they regard it as pettifoggery. For accuracy has
something of this character, so that as in trade so in argument some
people think it mean. Hence one must be already trained to know how to
take each sort of argument, since it is absurd to seek at the same
time knowledge and the way of attaining knowledge; and it is not
easy to get even one of the two.
    The minute accuracy of mathematics is not to be demanded in all
cases, but only in the case of things which have no matter. Hence
method is not that of natural science; for presumably the whole of
nature has matter. Hence we must inquire first what nature is: for
thus we shall also see what natural science treats of (and whether
it belongs to one science or to more to investigate the causes and the
principles of things).
                                Book III
                                   1

    WE must, with a view to the science which we are seeking, first
recount the subjects that should be first discussed. These include
both the other opinions that some have held on the first principles,
and any point besides these that happens to have been overlooked.
For those who wish to get clear of difficulties it is advantageous
to discuss the difficulties well; for the subsequent free play of
thought implies the solution of the previous difficulties, and it is
not possible to untie a knot of which one does not know. But the
difficulty of our thinking points to a 'knot' in the object; for in so
far as our thought is in difficulties, it is in like case with those
who are bound; for in either case it is impossible to go forward.
Hence one should have surveyed all the difficulties beforehand, both
for the purposes we have stated and because people who inquire without
first stating the difficulties are like those who do not know where
they have to go; besides, a man does not otherwise know even whether
he has at any given time found what he is looking for or not; for
the end is not clear to such a man, while to him who has first
discussed the difficulties it is clear. Further, he who has heard
all the contending arguments, as if they were the parties to a case,
must be in a better position for judging.
    The first problem concerns the subject which we discussed in our
prefatory remarks. It is this-(1) whether the investigation of the
causes belongs to one or to more sciences, and (2) whether such a
science should survey only the first principles of substance, or
also the principles on which all men base their proofs, e.g. whether
it is possible at the same time to assert and deny one and the same
thing or not, and all other such questions; and (3) if the science
in question deals with substance, whether one science deals with all
substances, or more than one, and if more, whether all are akin, or
some of them must be called forms of Wisdom and the others something
else. And (4) this itself is also one of the things that must be
discussed-whether sensible substances alone should be said to exist or
others also besides them, and whether these others are of one kind
or there are several classes of substances, as is supposed by those
who believe both in Forms and in mathematical objects intermediate
between these and sensible things. Into these questions, then, as we
say, we must inquire, and also (5) whether our investigation is
concerned only with substances or also with the essential attributes
of substances. Further, with regard to the same and other and like and
unlike and contrariety, and with regard to prior and posterior and all
other such terms about which the dialecticians try to inquire,
starting their investigation from probable premises only,-whose
business is it to inquire into all these? Further, we must discuss the
essential attributes of these themselves; and we must ask not only
what each of these is, but also whether one thing always has one
contrary. Again (6), are the principles and elements of things the
genera, or the parts present in each thing, into which it is
divided; and (7) if they are the genera, are they the genera that
are predicated proximately of the individuals, or the highest
genera, e.g. is animal or man the first principle and the more
independent of the individual instance? And (8) we must inquire and
discuss especially whether there is, besides the matter, any thing
that is a cause in itself or not, and whether this can exist apart
or not, and whether it is one or more in number, and whether there
is something apart from the concrete thing (by the concrete thing I
mean the matter with something already predicated of it), or there
is nothing apart, or there is something in some cases though not in
others, and what sort of cases these are. Again (9) we ask whether the
principles are limited in number or in kind, both those in the
definitions and those in the substratum; and (10) whether the
principles of perishable and of imperishable things are the same or
different; and whether they are all imperishable or those of
perishable things are perishable. Further (11) there is the question
which is hardest of all and most perplexing, whether unity and
being, as the Pythagoreans and Plato said, are not attributes of
something else but the substance of existing things, or this is not
the case, but the substratum is something else,-as Empedocles says,
love; as some one else says, fire; while another says water or air.
Again (12) we ask whether the principles are universal or like
individual things, and (13) whether they exist potentially or
actually, and further, whether they are potential or actual in any
other sense than in reference to movement; for these questions also
would present much difficulty. Further (14), are numbers and lines and
figures and points a kind of substance or not, and if they are
substances are they separate from sensible things or present in
them? With regard to all these matters not only is it hard to get
possession of the truth, but it is not easy even to think out the
difficulties well.
                                   2

    (1) First then with regard to what we mentioned first, does it
belong to one or to more sciences to investigate all the kinds of
causes? How could it belong to one science to recognize the principles
if these are not contrary?
    Further, there are many things to which not all the principles
pertain. For how can a principle of change or the nature of the good
exist for unchangeable things, since everything that in itself and
by its own nature is good is an end, and a cause in the sense that for
its sake the other things both come to be and are, and since an end or
purpose is the end of some action, and all actions imply change? So in
the case of unchangeable things this principle could not exist, nor
could there be a good itself. This is why in mathematics nothing is
proved by means of this kind of cause, nor is there any
demonstration of this kind-'because it is better, or worse'; indeed no
one even mentions anything of the kind. And so for this reason some of
the Sophists, e.g. Aristippus, used to ridicule mathematics; for in
the arts (he maintained), even in the industrial arts, e.g. in
carpentry and cobbling, the reason always given is 'because it is
better, or worse,' but the mathematical sciences take no account of
goods and evils.
    But if there are several sciences of the causes, and a different
science for each different principle, which of these sciences should
be said to be that which we seek, or which of the people who possess
them has the most scientific knowledge of the object in question?
The same thing may have all the kinds of causes, e.g. the moving cause
of a house is the art or the builder, the final cause is the
function it fulfils, the matter is earth and stones, and the form is
the definition. To judge from our previous discussion of the
question which of the sciences should be called Wisdom, there is
reason for applying the name to each of them. For inasmuch as it is
most architectonic and authoritative and the other sciences, like
slavewomen, may not even contradict it, the science of the end and
of the good is of the nature of Wisdom (for the other things are for
the sake of the end). But inasmuch as it was described' as dealing
with the first causes and that which is in the highest sense object of
knowledge, the science of substance must be of the nature of Wisdom.
For since men may know the same thing in many ways, we say that he who
recognizes what a thing is by its being so and so knows more fully
than he who recognizes it by its not being so and so, and in the
former class itself one knows more fully than another, and he knows
most fully who knows what a thing is, not he who knows its quantity or
quality or what it can by nature do or have done to it. And further in
all cases also we think that the knowledge of each even of the
things of which demonstration is possible is present only when we know
what the thing is, e.g. what squaring a rectangle is, viz. that it
is the finding of a mean; and similarly in all other cases. And we
know about becomings and actions and about every change when we know
the source of the movement; and this is other than and opposed to
the end. Therefore it would seem to belong to different sciences to
investigate these causes severally.
    But (2), taking the starting-points of demonstration as well as
the causes, it is a disputable question whether they are the object of
one science or of more (by the starting-points of demonstration I mean
the common beliefs, on which all men base their proofs); e.g. that
everything must be either affirmed or denied, and that a thing
cannot at the same time be and not be, and all other such
premisses:-the question is whether the same science deals with them as
with substance, or a different science, and if it is not one
science, which of the two must be identified with that which we now
seek.-It is not reasonable that these topics should be the object of
one science; for why should it be peculiarly appropriate to geometry
or to any other science to understand these matters? If then it
belongs to every science alike, and cannot belong to all, it is not
peculiar to the science which investigates substances, any more than
to any other science, to know about these topics.-And, at the same
time, in what way can there be a science of the first principles?
For we are aware even now what each of them in fact is (at least
even other sciences use them as familiar); but if there is a
demonstrative science which deals with them, there will have to be
an underlying kind, and some of them must be demonstrable attributes
and others must be axioms (for it is impossible that there should be
demonstration about all of them); for the demonstration must start
from certain premisses and be about a certain subject and prove
certain attributes. Therefore it follows that all attributes that
are proved must belong to a single class; for all demonstrative
sciences use the axioms.
    But if the science of substance and the science which deals with
the axioms are different, which of them is by nature more
authoritative and prior? The axioms are most universal and are
principles of all things. And if it is not the business of the
philosopher, to whom else will it belong to inquire what is true and
what is untrue about them?
    (3) In general, do all substances fall under one science or
under more than one? If the latter, to what sort of substance is the
present science to be assigned?-On the other hand, it is not
reasonable that one science should deal with all. For then there would
be one demonstrative science dealing with all attributes. For ever
demonstrative science investigates with regard to some subject its
essential attributes, starting from the common beliefs. Therefore to
investigate the essential attributes of one class of things,
starting from one set of beliefs, is the business of one science.
For the subject belongs to one science, and the premisses belong to
one, whether to the same or to another; so that the attributes do so
too, whether they are investigated by these sciences or by one
compounded out of them.
    (5) Further, does our investigation deal with substances alone
or also with their attributes? I mean for instance, if the solid is
a substance and so are lines and planes, is it the business of the
same science to know these and to know the attributes of each of these
classes (the attributes about which the mathematical sciences offer
proofs), or of a different science? If of the same, the science of
substance also must be a demonstrative science, but it is thought that
there is no demonstration of the essence of things. And if of another,
what will be the science that investigates the attributes of
substance? This is a very difficult question.
    (4) Further, must we say that sensible substances alone exist,
or that there are others besides these? And are substances of one kind
or are there in fact several kinds of substances, as those say who
assert the existence both of the Forms and of the intermediates,
with which they say the mathematical sciences deal?-The sense in which
we say the Forms are both causes and self-dependent substances has
been explained in our first remarks about them; while the theory
presents difficulties in many ways, the most paradoxical thing of
all is the statement that there are certain things besides those in
the material universe, and that these are the same as sensible
things except that they are eternal while the latter are perishable.
For they say there is a man-himself and a horse-itself and
health-itself, with no further qualification,-a procedure like that of
the people who said there are gods, but in human form. For they were
positing nothing but eternal men, nor are the Platonists making the
Forms anything other than eternal sensible things.
    Further, if we are to posit besides the Forms and the sensibles
the intermediates between them, we shall have many difficulties. For
clearly on the same principle there will be lines besides the
lines-themselves and the sensible lines, and so with each of the other
classes of things; so that since astronomy is one of these
mathematical sciences there will also be a heaven besides the sensible
heaven, and a sun and a moon (and so with the other heavenly bodies)
besides the sensible. Yet how are we to believe in these things? It is
not reasonable even to suppose such a body immovable, but to suppose
it moving is quite impossible.-And similarly with the things of
which optics and mathematical harmonics treat; for these also cannot
exist apart from the sensible things, for the same reasons. For if
there are sensible things and sensations intermediate between Form and
individual, evidently there will also be animals intermediate
between animals-themselves and the perishable animals.-We might also
raise the question, with reference to which kind of existing things we
must look for these sciences of intermediates. If geometry is to
differ from mensuration only in this, that the latter deals with
things that we perceive, and the former with things that are not
perceptible, evidently there will also be a science other than
medicine, intermediate between medical-science-itself and this
individual medical science, and so with each of the other sciences.
Yet how is this possible? There would have to be also healthy things
besides the perceptible healthy things and the healthy-itself.--And at
the same time not even this is true, that mensuration deals with
perceptible and perishable magnitudes; for then it would have perished
when they perished.
    But on the other hand astronomy cannot be dealing with perceptible
magnitudes nor with this heaven above us. For neither are
perceptible lines such lines as the geometer speaks of (for no
perceptible thing is straight or round in the way in which he
defines 'straight' and 'round'; for a hoop touches a straight edge not
at a point, but as Protagoras used to say it did, in his refutation of
the geometers), nor are the movements and spiral orbits in the heavens
like those of which astronomy treats, nor have geometrical points
the same nature as the actual stars.-Now there are some who say that
these so-called intermediates between the Forms and the perceptible
things exist, not apart from the perceptible things, however, but in
these; the impossible results of this view would take too long to
enumerate, but it is enough to consider even such points as the
following:-It is not reasonable that this should be so only in the
case of these intermediates, but clearly the Forms also might be in
the perceptible things; for both statements are parts of the same
theory. Further, it follows from this theory that there are two solids
in the same place, and that the intermediates are not immovable, since
they are in the moving perceptible things. And in general to what
purpose would one suppose them to exist indeed, but to exist in
perceptible things? For the same paradoxical results will follow which
we have already mentioned; there will be a heaven besides the
heaven, only it will be not apart but in the same place; which is
still more impossible.
                                   3

    (6) Apart from the great difficulty of stating the case truly with
regard to these matters, it is very hard to say, with regard to the
first principles, whether it is the genera that should be taken as
elements and principles, or rather the primary constituents of a
thing; e.g. it is the primary parts of which articulate sounds consist
that are thought to be elements and principles of articulate sound,
not the common genus-articulate sound; and we give the name of
'elements' to those geometrical propositions, the proofs of which
are implied in the proofs of the others, either of all or of most.
Further, both those who say there are several elements of corporeal
things and those who say there is one, say the parts of which bodies
are compounded and consist are principles; e.g. Empedocles says fire
and water and the rest are the constituent elements of things, but
does not describe these as genera of existing things. Besides this, if
we want to examine the nature of anything else, we examine the parts
of which, e.g. a bed consists and how they are put together, and
then we know its nature.
    To judge from these arguments, then, the principles of things
would not be the genera; but if we know each thing by its
definition, and the genera are the principles or starting-points of
definitions, the genera must also be the principles of definable
things. And if to get the knowledge of the species according to
which things are named is to get the knowledge of things, the genera
are at least starting-points of the species. And some also of those
who say unity or being, or the great and the small, are elements of
things, seem to treat them as genera.
    But, again, it is not possible to describe the principles in
both ways. For the formula of the essence is one; but definition by
genera will be different from that which states the constituent
parts of a thing.
    (7) Besides this, even if the genera are in the highest degree
principles, should one regard the first of the genera as principles,
or those which are predicated directly of the individuals? This also
admits of dispute. For if the universals are always more of the nature
of principles, evidently the uppermost of the genera are the
principles; for these are predicated of all things. There will,
then, be as many principles of things as there are primary genera,
so that both being and unity will be principles and substances; for
these are most of all predicated of all existing things. But it is not
possible that either unity or being should be a single genus of
things; for the differentiae of any genus must each of them both
have being and be one, but it is not possible for the genus taken
apart from its species (any more than for the species of the genus) to
be predicated of its proper differentiae; so that if unity or being is
a genus, no differentia will either have being or be one. But if unity
and being are not genera, neither will they be principles, if the
genera are the principles. Again, the intermediate kinds, in whose
nature the differentiae are included, will on this theory be genera,
down to the indivisible species; but as it is, some are thought to
be genera and others are not thought to be so. Besides this, the
differentiae are principles even more than the genera; and if these
also are principles, there comes to be practically an infinite
number of principles, especially if we suppose the highest genus to be
a principle.-But again, if unity is more of the nature of a principle,
and the indivisible is one, and everything indivisible is so either in
quantity or in species, and that which is so in species is the
prior, and genera are divisible into species for man is not the
genus of individual men), that which is predicated directly of the
individuals will have more unity.-Further, in the case of things in
which the distinction of prior and posterior is present, that which is
predicable of these things cannot be something apart from them (e.g.
if two is the first of numbers, there will not be a Number apart
from the kinds of numbers; and similarly there will not be a Figure
apart from the kinds of figures; and if the genera of these things
do not exist apart from the species, the genera of other things will
scarcely do so; for genera of these things are thought to exist if any
do). But among the individuals one is not prior and another posterior.
Further, where one thing is better and another worse, the better is
always prior; so that of these also no genus can exist. From these
considerations, then, the species predicated of individuals seem to be
principles rather than the genera. But again, it is not easy to say in
what sense these are to be taken as principles. For the principle or
cause must exist alongside of the things of which it is the principle,
and must be capable of existing in separation from them; but for
what reason should we suppose any such thing to exist alongside of the
individual, except that it is predicated universally and of all? But
if this is the reason, the things that are more universal must be
supposed to be more of the nature of principles; so that the highest
genera would be the principles.